---
layout: page
title: Immune Dynamics Team
permalink: /about/
---

The Immune Dynamics Team develop and apply high-dimensional cytometry and imaging assays, as well as computational analysis tools, to map dynamic immune responses over time, space, and disease. These approaches are applied to the study of immunology and infectious disease, including emerging pathogens such as SARS-CoV-2/COVID-19, Zika virus encephalitis, and West Nile virus encephalitis.

<br />

**Dr. Thomas Ashhurst**

Dr. Thomas Ashhurst is an immunologist and high-dimensional cytometry specialist with the Sydney Cytometry Core Research Facility at The University of Sydney. In this role, he leads a research effort to develop and apply a range of single-cell cytometry/imaging technologies and assays, as well as computational analysis tools, to map dynamic immune responses over time, space, and disease. In particular, he applies these approaches collaboratively to the study of immunology and infectious disease, including emerging pathogens such as SARS-CoV-2/COVID-19, Zika virus encephalitis, and West Nile virus encephalitis.

**Dr. Mark Read**

I am a Lecturer in Biomedical Computation at the University of Sydney, in the School of Computer Science.

My group specialises in understanding biological systems through computational, mathematical and statistical approaches. This is ever more relevant as high-throughput and imaging technologies transform BioMedicine into a more data-centric field. Our focus is primarily on immunological systems, and the microbial communities that inhabit the gut.
